---
title: A citation elements vocabulary
date: 9 May 2016
...
# A citation elements vocabulary

{.ednote} This is a **first draft** of material intended to form the
introduction to a FHISO Citation Elements standard.

FHISO's **citation elements vocabulary** provides a standard, extensible
framework for encoding all the data about a genealogical *source* that
might reasonably be included in a *formatted citation* to that *source*.
It does not seek to provide an exhaustive description of *sources*.

{.note}  This *citation element vocabulary* covers just a small part of
the genealogy domain, and it is anticipated that parties adopting this
standard will wish to incorporate it in whatever serialisation format
they currently use.  For this reason, this standard does not define a
serialisation format.

## General

The key words *must*, *must not*, *required*, *shall*, *shall not*,
*should*, *should not*, *recommended*,  *may* and *optional* in this
standard are to be interpreted as described in [[RFC
2119](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119)].

An application is **conformant** with this standard if and only if it
follows all the requirements and prohibitions contained in this
document, as indicated by use of the words *must*, *must not*,
*required*, *shall* and *shall not*, and the relevant parts of its
normative references.  Standards referencing this standard *must not*
loosen any of the requirements and prohibitions made by this standard,
nor place additional requirements or prohibitions on the constructs
defined herein.  

{.note} Adding requirements or prohibitions is disallowed so as to
preserve interoperability between applications: data generated by one
*conformant* application must always be acceptable to another
*conformant* application, regardless of what additional standards each
may conform to. 

Indented text in coloured boxes, such as preceding paragraph, does not
form a normative part of this standard, and is labelled as either an
example or a note.  

{.ednote} Editorial notes, such as this, are used to record outstanding
issues, or points where there is not yet consensus; they will be
resolved and removed for the final standard.  Examples and notes will be
retained in the standard.

## Characters and strings

The grammar given here uses the same EBNF notation as
[[XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/)], except that no significance is
attached to the capitalisation of grammar symbols.  *Conforming*
applications *must not* generate data not conforming to the syntax given
here, but non-conforming syntax *may* be accepted and processed by a
*conforming* application in an implementation-defined manner.

**Characters** are specified by reference to their *code point* number
in [ISO 10646], without regard to any particular character encoding.  In
this standard *characters* may be identified in this standard by their
hexadecimal code point prefixed with "U+".

{.note} The character encoding is a property of the serialisation, and
not defined in this standard.  Non-Unicode encodings are not precluded,
so long as it is defined how characters in that encoding corresponds to
Unicode characters.

*Characters* *must* match the `Char` production from
[[XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/)].

    Char  ::=  [#1-#xD7FF] | [#xE000-#xFFFD] | [#x10000-#x10FFFF]

{.note} This includes all *code points* except the null character,
surrogates (which are reserved for encodings such as UTF-16 and not
characters in their own right), and the invalid characters U+FFFE and
U+FFFF.

A **string** is a sequence of zero or more *characters*.

{.note} The definition of a *string* is identical to the definition of
the `xs:string` datatype defined in [[XSD
Pt2](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/)], used in many XML and
Semantic Web technologies.

*Characters* matching the `RestrictedChar` production from
[[XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/)] *should not* appear in
*strings*, and applications *may* process such characters in an
implementation-defined manner or reject *strings* containing them.

    RestrictedChar  ::=  [#x1-#x8] | [#xB-#xC] | [#xE-#x1F]
                           | [#x7F-#x84] | [#x86-#x9F]

{.note} This includes all C0 and C1 control characters except tab
(U+0009), line feed (U+000A), carriage return (U+000D) and next line
(U+0085).

{.example} As applications can process C1 control characters in an
implementation-defined manner, they can opt to handle Windows-1252
quotation in data masquerading as Unicode.

**Whitespace** is defined as a sequence of one or more space
*characters*, carriage returns, line feeds, or tabs.  It matches the
production `S` from [[XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/)].

    S  ::=  (#x20 | #x9 | #xD | #xA)+

**Whitespace normalisation** is the process of discarding any leading
or trailing *whitespace*, and replacing other *whitespace* with a single
space (U+0020) *character*.  

{.note}  The definition of *whitespace normalisation* is identical to
that in [[XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/)].

In the event of a difference between the definitions of the `Char`,
`RestrictedChar` and `S` productions given here and those in
[[XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/)], the definitions in the latest
edition of XML 1.1 specification are applicable.

## Sources and citations

A **source** is any resource from which information is obtained during
the genealogical research process.  *Sources* come in many forms,
including manuscripts, artefacts, books, films, people, recordings and
websites.  A full mechanism for describing *sources* is
beyond the scope of this standard.

A **citation** is an abstract reference to a specific *source* from
which information has been used in some context.  It *should* include
sufficient detail that a third-party could readily locate the
information themselves, assuming the *source* remains accessible.

A **formatted citation** is a *citation* that has been rendered into
human-readable form, typically as a sentence or short paragraph that
might be used as a footnote, endnote or bibliography entry.  There is no
single standard for the correct form of *formatted citations*; many
different style guides exist, each giving their own rules on how to
construct a *formatted citation*.

{.example ...}  A *formatted citation* produced for use in a footnote on
the first use of the *source*, and conforming to [Chicago] might read:

>   ^1^ &nbsp; Christian Settipani, *Les ancêtres de Charlemagne*, 2nd
>   ed. (Oxford: Prosopographia et Genealogica, 2015), 129–31.

The ^1^ at the start of the citation is the hypothetical footnote number.
{/}

A **citation element** is a representation of a logically self-contained
piece of information about a *source* that might reasonably be included
in a *formatted citation*.  The information is stored in a sufficiently
structured way that applications can parse and reformat it as needed
when producing a *formatted citation*.

A **citation element set** is an unordered set of *citation elements*
that completely encode the information about a *source* required to
produce a *formatted citation*.  Given a *citation element set* and any
necessary internal state, an application should be able to produce 
algorithmically a *formatted citation* in any mainstream citation style;
they need not use every *citation element* in doing so if the style
dictates that certain information is omitted in certain contexts.

{.example ...}  The earlier example *formatted citation* to *Les ancêtres de
Charlemagne* is represented by a *citation element set* containing the
following seven *citation elements*:

*   The author: "`Settipani, Christian`".
*   The title: "`Les ancêtres de Charlemagne`".
*   The edition: "`2`".
*   The place of publication: "`Oxford`".
*   The publisher: "`Prosopographia et Genealogica`".
*   The year of publication: "`2015`".
*   The page range: "`129-131`".

The footnote number is not a *citation element* as it does not pertain
to the *source*.  The author and page range are not expressed here in
quite the same form as the *formatted citation*, but an application can
readily parse them to convert them to the required format because their
format is defined by this standard.  {/}

*Citation element sets* *should not* include *citation elements* for
information that is not normally included in a *formatted citation*. 
They are not intended to provide a general mechanism for storing
arbitrary information about *sources*.

{.example} *Formatted citations* do not normally include details such as
the email addresses, phone numbers or academic affiliations of authors,
so they should not be included in the *citation element set*.

A *citation element* consists of three parts: 

*  a name, called the *citation element name*; 
*  a value, called the *citation element value*; and
*  an *optional* *language tag*, identifying the language of value.

A *citation element set* *must not* contain more than one *citation
element* with the same *citation element name* and *language tag*.

{.note}  Many languages and serialisation formats provide a map or
dictionary type which could be suitable for storing a *citation element
set*.   JSON's object notion, given in §4 of [[RFC
7159](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159)], is an example.  The
*language tag* complicates the use of these types &mdash; is it part of
the map key, or the map value?  It is *recommended* that if it not
possible to use a pair comprising both the *citation element name* and
the *language tag* as the map key, then the *language tag* should be
included in the map value.

{.ednote}  This simple model where a citation is represented by a
name-value map may not be sufficient for **layer citations** &mdash;
*citations* containing information on the resource consulted, as
well as the resources from which it is derived.  FHISO have deferred
discussion of this issue until other aspects of this standard are more
complete.


### Citation elements names

The **citation element name** is an identifier used to identify what
information the *citation element* contains.  It *shall* take the form
of an IRI matching the `IRI` production in §2.2 of [[RFC
3987](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987)].

{.example}  This standard defines a *citation element* for the title of
a *source*.  It has the *citation element name*
`http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/title`.

{.note} IRIs have been chosen in preference to URIs because it is
recognised that certain culture-specific genealogical concepts may not
have English names, and in such cases the human-legibility of IRIs is
advantageous.

This standard defines many *citation elements*, all of which have a
*citation element name* that begins `http://terms.fhiso.org/`.  These
aim to cover the information normally found in *formatted citations* to
a wide range of *sources*, but applications *may* define their own
*citation elements* or use those defined by a third-party standard; such
*citation elements* are known as *extension citation elements*.  It is
*recommended* that any *extension citation elements* also use the `http`
IRI scheme defined in §2.7.1 of [[RFC
7230](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230)], and an authority component
consisting of just a domain name (or subdomain) under the control of the
party defining the *extension citation elements*.  *Conforming*
applications *must not* discard unrecognised *extension citation
elements*, other than at the instruction of the user, but *may* opt not
to display them.

It is *recommended* that an HTTP 1.1 `GET` request made without an
`Accept` header to the *citation element name* IRI (once converted to a
URI per §3.1 of [[RFC 3987](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987)])
*should* result in a 303 "See Other" redirect to a document containing a
human-readable definition of the element.

{.note}  A 303 redirect is considered best practice for [[Linked
Data](http://linkeddatabook.com/editions/1.0/)], so as to
avoid confusing the *citation element name* IRI with its definition,
which is found at the post-redirect URL.  The *citation elements*
defined in this standard are not specifically designed for use in Linked
Data, but the same considerations apply.

{.ednote} A future draft of this standard is likely to add support for a
**discovery** mechanism, whereby a HTTP 1.1 `GET` request to the
*citation element name* IRI, made with an appropriate `Accept` header,
yields a machine-readable definition of the *citation element*.  Support
for this by the authors of *extension citation elements* is likely to be
*recommended* but not *required*, while application support for it would
be *optional*.

*Citation element names* are compared using the "simple string
comparison" algorithm given in §5.3.1 of [[RFC
3987](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987)].  If a *citation element
name* does not compare equal to an IRI known to the application, it
*must not* make any assumptions on the purpose of the *citation element*
or the meaning of its value based on the IRI.

{.note} This is a simple character-by-character comparison, with no
normalisation carried out on the IRIs prior to comparison.  This is how
XML namespace names are compared in [[XML
Names](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/)].

{.example ...}  For the purpose of comparing *citation element names*,
the following IRIs are all distinct, even though an HTTP request to them
would fetch the same resource.

    http://éléments.example.com/nationalité
    HTTP://ÉLÉMENTS.EXAMPLE.COM/nationalit%C3%A9
    http://xn--lments-9uab.example.com/nationalit%c3%a9

{/}

In additional to describing the intended purpose of the *citation
element*, the definition of a *citation element* (regardless of whether
it is one of those defined in this standard, or whether it is an
*extension citation element*) *shall* state:

*   its canonical *citation element name*;
*   its **cardinality**: whether it is *single-valued* or
    *list-valued*; 
*   its **range**: the formal *class name* of its value or values; and
*   whether the *range* *class name* allows *language tags*.

A **list-valued** *citation element* is one that can logically have
multiple values.  It *should* be reserved for situations where the
values genuinely contains different information, and not used to
accommodate transliterations, translations, or variant forms of text.
*Citation elements* that are not *list-valued* are **single-valued**.

{.example}  The `http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/creators-name` *citation
element* used to record the authors, editors and compilers of a *source*
is *list-valued* because *sources* may have multiple authors.  The
`http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/title` *citation element* is
*single-valued*, as *sources* normally only have one title; *language
tags* provide a way of giving a transliterated version of the title.

A **citation element declaration** is a serialisation of the formal
definition of a *citation element*.  It *must* include the *citation
element name* and its *cardinality*, *should* include its *range*, and
*may* include other details.

{.ednote}  This draft does not define a format for *citation element
declarations*.  In earlier discussion, a format based on JSON-LD's
`@context` was mooted, setting `@container` to either `@list` or `null`
for each *citation element name*c; however the handling of *language
tags* seemingly prevents this from being done in a way that is
compatible with JSON-LD.

### Citation elements values

The **citation element value** is the content of the *citation element*,
and is either a *string* or a ordered **list** of *strings*, depending on
whether the *citation element* is *single-valued* or *list-valued*.
This standard does not state how a *list* should be represented, and 
it will depend on the serialisation being used.

{.ednote}  Initial discussion suggested that an unordered set of
*strings* should be possible as a *citation element value*.  As there no
use case has yet been found for this, it has not been included in this
draft; it may be added to subsequent drafts.

{.example ...}  In the earlier example of *Les ancêtres de Charlemagne*,
the title could be encoded in a *citation element* with:

*    the *name* `http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/title`; and
*    a *value* comprising the *string* "`Les ancêtres de Charlemagne`".

The author could be encoded with a *citation element* with:

*    the *name* `http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/creators-name`; and
*    a *value* which is a list of one *string*, "`Christian Settipani`".

In the former case, the value is a *string* because the `title`
*citation element* is defined to be single-valued, while the
`creators-name` *citation element* is defined as being list-valued.  {/}

{.ednote}  The precise details of *citation elements* for authorship
(and how to accommodate concepts like editors, compilers and
translators) are as yet undecided.  The *citation element name* used in
this example may need updating to reflect the final decision.

A *citation element* defined as being *list-valued* *must not* have a
*citation element value* which is a *string*; a *citation element*
defined as being *single-valued* *must not* have a *citation element
value* which is a list.  In the conceptual model defined by this
standard, a *string* is different to a *list* of one *string*.

Applications *may* convert any *citation element value* into Unicode
Normalization Form C, as defined in any version of Unicode Standard
Annex #15 [[UAX 15](http://unicode.org/reports/tr15/)].

{.note} This allows applications to store *citation element values*
internally in either Normalization Form C or Normalization Form D for
ease of searching, sorting and comparison, without also retaining the
original, unnormalised form.

Applications *may* *whitespace-normalised* *citation element values*,
and in such elements, the `S` *whitespace* production collapses to a
single space (U+0020).

### Language Tags

Each *citation element* *may* contain a *language tag* which *shall*, if
present, match the `Language-Tag` production from [[RFC
5646](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5646)].  Because several *citation
elements* with the same *citation element name* are permitted if they
have different *language tags*, even for *single-valued* *citation
elements*, this *may* be used to provide transliterated versions of the
*citation element value*.  The script subtags,
described in §2.2.3 of [[RFC
5646](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5646)] should be used when an
element has been transliterated.  

Some *citation elements* have non-textual *citation element values* (for
example if they are numbers), and such *citation element names* *should*
be defined not to allow *language tags*.  When this is the case, a
*language tag* *must not* be provided.  When a *citation elements*
contains an untranslated, untransliterated *citation element value*, as
found in the *source*, the *language tag* *should* be omitted.  In all
other circumstances, *citation elements* *should* contain a *language
tag*.

{.note} If there is not an obvious *language tag* to use, [[ISO
639-2](http://www.loc.gov/standards/iso639-2/)] provides the codes `mul`
for when multiple languages are used, `und` for when the language is
undetermined, and `zxx` for when there is no linguistic content present.

{.example}  The `title` element is defined to be *single-valued* in this
standard, but a *citation element set* may contain a `title` element
with the value "`Η Γενεαλογία των Κομνηνών`" and no language code (it
being in the original, untransliterated Greek), and another with the
value "`Hē Genealogia tōn Komnēnōn`" tagged with the *language tag*
"`el-Latn`".  Were the original language unknown, which might be the
case if transliteration were supplied by a computer, it could be tagged
"`und-Latn`".

{.ednote} Translation has not been included in this draft because the
*citation element* containing the original is untagged, meaning there is
no way of distinguishing between translated and transliterated versions.
Adding a language tag to the original would not help, as there would
then be no way of knowing it is the original, and still no way of
knowing what what was a translation.  In any case, most style guides
advocate only transliterating and not translating *citation elements*.
If there is a good use case for allowing translation, a work-around
would be to define a private use subtag like `x-original` to mark the
original; a better mechanism would be preferable.

If the *citation elements* are being serialised in XML, it is
*recommended* that the special `xml:lang` attribute defined in §2.12 of 
[[XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/)] is used to encode the *language
tag*.

### A JSON serialisation

{.ednote} There has been little discussion, and therefore no consensus
has been established, on whether to include a serialisation format in
this standard.  The principal motivation in providing one is to provide
an easy way of providing example data in this standard.  For this
purpose, a JSON syntax is more compact than an XML one.

This section defines a JSON serialisation of *citation element sets*.
Support for it is *optional*; even if an application wishes to support
serialisation to JSON, it may opt to do it differently.

A *citation element name* *shall* be serialised as a JSON string (per §7
of [[RFC 7159](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159)]) containing the
*citation element name*.

A *citation element value* which is a *string* *shall* be serialised as
a JSON string; a *citation element value* which is a *list* *shall* be
serialised as a JSON array of strings (per §5 of [[RFC
7159](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159)]).

{.example}  A book title would be serialised `"Royal Ancestry"` as the
`title` *citation element* is single-valued.  Its author would be
serialised `[ "Richardson, Douglas" ]` as the `creators-name` *citation
element* is list-valued.

The serialised *citation element value* *shall* be wrapped in an JSON
object (per §4 of [[RFC 7159](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159)])
comprising two members: one named `value` or `list` (depending on
whether the *citation element* is *single-valued* or *list-valued*) whose
value is the serialised *citation element value*, the other named `lang`
whose value is the *language tag* as a JSON string.  If the *language
tag* is omitted, either the `lang` member may be omitted or it may be
explicitly set to `null`.

{.example ...}  The wrapped versions of book title and author from the
previous example are: 

    { "value": "Royal Ancestry", "lang": null }
    { "list": [ "Richardson, Douglas" ] }

In this example, the former explicitly sets the `lang` to `null`, while
the latter does so implicitly.  Both are acceptable.  {/}

A *citation element set* is serialised as a JSON object, with each
distinct *citation element name* serialised as the JSON member name.  If
the *citation element name* is declared not to allow *language tags*,
then the JSON member value is the serialised *citation element value*;
if *language tags* are allowed, then the JSON member value is a JSON
array containing the wrapped version of every *citation element value*
from a *citation element* with the current *citation element name*.

{.example ...}  A simple *citation element set* containing just the
title and author of *Royal Ancestry* would be:

    { "http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/title":
        [ { "value": "Royal Ancestry" } ],
      "http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/creators-name":
        [ { "list": [ "Richardson, Douglas" ] } ] }

For an example demonstrating transliteration, consider
the title and author of the book *Η Γενεαλογία των Κομνηνών*:

    { "http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/title": 
        [ { "value": "Η Γενεαλογία των Κομνηνών" },
          { "value": "Hē Genealogia tōn Komnēnōn", "lang": "el-Latn" } ],
      "http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/creators-name":
        [ { "list": [ "Βαρζος, Κωνσταντίνος" ] },
          { "list": [ "Varzos, Konstantinos" ], "lang": "el-Latn" } ] }
{/}

{.note ...}  The syntax has deliberately been chosen to be compatible
with [[JSON-LD](https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld/)].  To parse it as
JSON-LD, the following `@context` must be available to the parser.:

    "@context": { "value": "@value", "lang": "@language", 
                  "list": "@list" }

As this syntax is valid JSON-LD, this defines a conversion to
RDF using the algorithm set out in §10 of [[JSON-LD
API](https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld-api/)].  {/}

{.ednote}  The combination of *language tags* and *list-valued*
*citation elements* means that the serialisation cannot take advantage
of JSON-LD's compact list representation by setting `@container` to
`@list`.  This is the reason why separate `value` and `list` keywords
are need in the serialisation proposed here.  If a simplification is
possible, it would be beneficial.

### List-flattening formats

It is anticipated that some adopters may need to serialise *citation
element sets* in a **list-flattening format** that does not allow a
*list* of one *string* to be distinguished from a single *string*.  

{.example ...} An application may wish to serialise *citation element
sets* as XML in a format with one element per *string* value, such as
follows:

    <elements>
      <element name="http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/title"
               value="[Eirene?], First Wife of Emperor Isaakios II" />
      <element name="http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/creators-name"
               value="Stone, Don C." />
      <element name="http://terms.fhiso.org/sources/creators-name"
               value="Owens, Charles R." />
    </elements>

In such a serialisation, there's no way of telling from the data that
the `creators-name` *citation element* is *list-valued*.  It can be
determined empirically when more than one author is given (as in this
example), but when only a single `creators-name` is given, the
serialisation gives no indication of whether a `creators-name` is
*list-valued* or *single-valued*.  This format is therefore
*list-flattening*. {/}

*List-flattening formats* are permitted by this standard; however, if
application uses such a format, it *must* ensure that the serialised
data includes a *citation element declaration* for every *extension
citation element* used in the data.  For consistency, it is
*recommended* that *citation element declarations* are also given for
*citation elements* defined by this standard.  *Citation element
declarations* *may* be included in non-*list-flattening formats* too.

{.note} This is essential to ensure that an application can convert data
from a *list-flattening format* to a non-*list-flattening format*, even
if unknown *extension citation elements* are present.  As these *must
not* be discarded, the data cannot be processed without a *citation
element declaration*.

## References

### Normative references

[ISO 10646]
:   ISO (International Organization for Standardization).  *ISO/IEC
    10646:2014. Information technology &mdash; Universal Coded Character
    Set (UCS).*  2014.

[ISO 639-2]
:   ISO (International Organization for Standardization).  *ISO
    639-2:1998.  Codes for the representation of names of languages
    &mdash; Part 2: Alpha-3 code*.  1998.  (See
    <http://www.loc.gov/standards/iso639-2/>.)

[RFC 2119]
:   IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force).  *RFC 2119:  Key words for
    use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels.*  Scott Bradner, 1997.
    (See <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119>.)

[RFC 3987]
:   IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force).  *RFC 3987:
    Internationalized Resource Identifiers (IRIs).*  Martin Duerst and
    Michel Suignard, 2005. (See <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987>.)

[RFC 5646]
:   IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force).  *RFC 5646:
    Tags for Identifying Languages.*  Addison Phillips and Mark Davis,
    eds., 2009.  (See <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5646>.)

[RFC 7230]
:   IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force).  *RFC 7230:  Hypertext
    Transfer Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Message Syntax and Routing.*  Roy
    Fieldind and Julian Reschke, eds., 2014.  (See
    <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230>.)

[UAX 15]
:   The Unicode Consortium.  "Unicode Standard Annex 15: Unicode
    Normalization Forms" in *The Unicode Standard, Version 8.0.0.*
    Mark Davis and Ken Whistler, eds., 2015.  (See
    <http://unicode.org/reports/tr15/>.)

[XML]
:   W3C (World Wide Web Consortium). *Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.1*, 
    2nd edition.  Tim Bray, Jean Paoli, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen, Eve
    Maler, François Yergeau, and John Cowan eds., 2006.  W3C
    Recommendation.  (See <https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/>.)

### Other references

[Chicago]
:   *The Chicago Manual of Style*, 16th ed.  Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 2010.

[JSON-LD]
:   W3C (World Wide Web Consortium).  *JSON-LD 1.0 &mdash;  A JSON-based
    Serialization for Linked Data.*  Manu Sporny, Gregg Kellogg and
    Markus Lanthaler, eds., 2014.  W3C Recommendation.  (See
    <https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld/>.)

[JSON-LD API]
:   W3C (World Wide Web Consortium).  *JSON-LD 1.0 Processing Algorithms
    and API.*  Manu Sporny, Gregg Kellogg and Markus Lanthaler, eds.,
    2014.  W3C Recommendation.  (See
    <https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld-api/>.)

[Linked Data]
:   Heath, Tom and Christian Bizer.  *Linked Data: Evolving the Web into
    a Global Data Space*, 1st edition.  Morgan & Claypool, 2011.
    (See <http://linkeddatabook.com/editions/1.0/>.)

[RFC 7159]
:   IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force).  *The JavaScript Object
    Notation (JSON) Data Interchange Format*  Tim Bray, ed., 2014.
    (See <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159>.)

[XML Names]
:   World Wide Web Consortium. *Namespaces in XML 1.1*, 2nd edition.
    Tim Bray, Dave Hollander, Andrew Layman and Richard Tobin, eds., 2006.  
    W3C Recommendation.  See <https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/>.

[XSD Pt2]
:   World Wide Web Consortium. *W3C XML Schema Definition Language (XSD)
    1.1 Part 2: Datatypes*.  W3C Recommendation.  See
    <https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/>

